docs: add entities.mdx example (#859)
feature-sliced/documentation: i18n/en/docusaurus-plugin-content-docs/current/guides/examples/entities.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Entities

`entities` layer in Feature-Sliced Design encapsulates core business logic, similar to entities in backend applications. However, its use in frontend applications is not always necessary and should be approached with caution to avoid overcomplicating the codebase.

## When to Use the `entities` Layer

> Most frontend applications function as "thin clients" with minimal business logic, relying on the backend for data processing. In such cases, `entities` layer can often be omitted in favor of `shared/api`. Use `entities` layer only when the following conditions are met:

Reviewer: praise: great that you mention thin clients, this concept is very important to proper use of Entities, but is currently absent in the docs

suggestion: I do feel like it might be a non-self-explanatory concept though, so how about we add a proper `##` heading explaining what are thin vs thick clients before this section?

Author: Done

> - The application handles **client-only data structures** with significant **client-only business logic**.

Reviewer: issue: I don't entirely agree here that a data structure needs to be client-only to warrant a place in entities. 

As an example from my practice, one application I worked on had some non-trivial logic of computing whether the project in its current state can be moved to the next stage. The project was made up of blocks, and each type of block needed to fulfill a certain _different_ condition before the whole project was ready to move to the next step. This logic was implemented on the backend, but for real-time feedback, it was also reimplemented on the frontend.

To me, this reimplementation of business rules is still very much business logic, even if it's not client-only (although to be fair, maybe this particular case relates more to features than entities, but I think my point here still stands).

suggestion: let's broaden the definition:
```suggestion
- The frontend encodes certain rules about how data structures behave, i. e., _business logic_.
- This business logic is used in several parts of the application or is central to the entire purpose of the application.
```

Reviewer: I messed up the "suggested change", I meant to replace not just the first bullet point, but both of them

Author: I refactored this section a bit to make sure that “hybrid” is not an exceptional case:

The idea is to make sure that:
- Developers don't create entities by copy-pasting DTOs, as it _will_ require workarounds like cross-imports and lead to the issue of the `entities` layer not providing any meaningful abstraction.
- Let developers put business logic inside the `entities` layer, but keep DTOs on a different layer to allow future abstractions from DTOs (if required).

- The entity is **heavily reused** across multiple parts of the application.

If you end it a situation where you can't create an entity, but you have a significant amount of reused client-only business logic, you can do a hybrid approach:

- Keep all types/DTOs in `shared/api` without creating a new entity.
- Use `shared/api` for data fetching operations like create, read, update, delete, filter, etc.

> - Use `entities/<name>/model` for client-only business logic.

Reviewer: issue: this part is a bit confusing to me overall. 

> If you end it a situation where you can't create an entity

How can this situation arise? Does "can't" here refer to external factors or does it refer to the rules above that dictate that you "mustn't" create an entity?

> you have a significant amount of reused client-only business logic

I think a short example would really benefit this section, off the top of my head I'm struggling to imagine what this might look like. Particularly, in light of my previous comment, I'm not sure what is "client-only" business logic, and if such business logic even exists. To me, a client, a frontend, should never be the only party that controls data consistency and adherence to business rules, because a client can never be trusted.

suggestion: I think this hybrid approach is an idea with great potential, so we might be better off dedicating an entire section to it, rather than trying to squeeze it in here. Then we'd also be able to provide examples and expand on the scenario that this hybrid approach might be preferable, as well as mention some pros and cons

### Examples of Valid Use Cases

> 1. **Client-Only Entities**: If the frontend manages an entity that does not exist on the backend and involves complex business logic, consider placing it in `entities` layer. This is appropriate only if the entity is used extensively across the application.

Reviewer: issue: I think we're often using the term "entity" without establishing first what an entity is, even though that's what the whole section is about

suggestion: I think DDD has run up against the same issue before, so we might be able to look to them for inspiration for a defintion of "entity". This question on Stack Overflow, for example, provides some insight, but will still probably need more explanation: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57367017/the-meaning-of-entity-in-domain-driven-design

Reviewer: question: Regarding this part:

> This is appropriate only if the entity is used extensively across the application

I'm struggling to come up with an example of an entity that would have complex business logic, but wouldn't be worthy of being put into the entities layer. Do you have some examples?

Author: I will probably need some help with defining "Entity", as for now we only describe it by its properties, and it is challenging to make a good formal description :thinking: 

And tried to specify "heavy" use with https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_three_(computer_programming)

> 2. **Aggregating Microservices Data**: When the backend is split across microservices and the frontend needs to combine data with significant client-side business logic, an aggregate entity in `entities` layer may be justified.

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): this point might not necessarily be about microservices, but broadly also about any kind of aggregation and synchronization of data from several sources, we can probably expand the example here or add another point

:::note

> Both heavy client-side business logic and client-only data structures must be present to justify creating an entity. If either criterion is missing, avoid creating an entity.

Reviewer: issue: this line forbids doing something without really offering an alternative, which could leave the user stranded, not knowing what to do

suggestion: this whole line would also probably change if we remove the "client-only" condition. Regardless, I think we should direct the user towards some libraries for managing server state like TanStack Query, although I'd prefer if this wasn't our only suggestion, since there's a fair amount of people who dislike it. At least for TanStack Query we have a guide that we can point to

:::

## Best Practices

> To maintain a clean and maintainable codebase, adhere to the following rules:

Reviewer: issue (non-blocking): 

> To maintain a clean and maintainable codebase

this feels like an overpromise to me :) There are many other factors in maintaining a clean and maintainable (tautological btw) codebase

suggestion:

```suggestion
To make the Entities layer easy to navigate, adhere to the following rules:
```

> - **Avoid Dangling Entities**: Do not create entities that are used only once. Treat `entities` layer like any other layer in a pages-first approach, ensuring entity is actually needed.

Reviewer: issue: there might be legitimate reasons to create entities that are only used on a single page, if that page is the main thing about the application. I'm talking about some highly interactive web app like an editor of some kind.

suggestion: let's loosen this criterion, after all, it's "pages-first", not "pages-only".

```suggestion
- **Avoid Dangling Entities**: Be suspicious of entities that are used only once. If the entity doesn't facilitate code reuse across several pages, consider moving its code into the page itself if it's possible and practical. This will increase the cohesion of your code, ensuring that related things are close to each other.
```

Reviewer: nitpick (non-blocking): I'm also not sure what the point of the title case is in "Avoid Dangling Entities". It's okay-ish on this line, but on the next line, "Do Not Replicate Backend Entities", it makes my eyes jump way too often as I read.

suggestion: I think these rules would look just as good without title case:
```
- **Avoid dangling entities**: …
````

> - **Do Not Replicate Backend Entities**: Backend entities and API responses belong in `shared/api`, not `entities` layer. `entities` layer is for client-specific logic, not for mirroring server-side data structures.

Reviewer: issue: this feels a bit too prescriptive. I don't see that much of a problem with putting API requests and DTOs in Entities as long as it's a conscious decision because for some reason, putting them in `shared/api` didn't sit right with the team. I think we should advocate for putting API code in Shared, but not prescribe it

suggestion: let's tone this down a bit:
```suggestion
- **Consider keeping backend-related code in `shared/api`**: The Entities layer works best for encoding business logic rules. If these rules are mostly encoded on the backend, consider moving your API request functions, DTOs, and mappers into `shared/api`. This provides fewer architectural restrictions, which can help you iterate faster and avoid arguments when a backend endpoint relates to several kinds of entities at once.
```

I also added an explanation for why it's preferable to consider that

## Common Pitfalls

Seasoned developers may be inclined to create an entity for every piece of data in the application. This is a mistake in FSD. Overusing the entities layer can lead to unnecessary complexity and maintenance overhead. Most frontend applications function effectively without `entities` layer, relying instead on `shared/api` for data fetching and minimal logic.

:::note

Prematurely introducing `entities` layer can harm the project's scalability and maintainability. Evaluate whether the layer is truly necessary before adding it.

> :::

Reviewer: issue: I think we've made our point, this feels like rephrasing the same thing again :D

suggestion: let's drop this section
